feat: Add security best practices for certified variables (#3091)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/data-integrity-and-authenticity.mdx

Reviewer: The overview of the query and update calls is really useful but it does reiterate [this info](https://f7i7o-aaaaa-aaaam-abtba-cai.icp0.io/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#update-calls). Should we just reference the other page to avoid duplication and possibly outdated info?

Author: Good point, I didn't know we had this section already. I will reference it back to the page.

Reviewer: We could add a short summary along the lines of:

> As explain in REF, update calls are slow and expensive but query call results can be manipulated by a replica or boundary node. In certain use cases, there is a third option whereby query results can return data that has been certified by the subnet in an earlier update call. This is the concept of certified data and it requires changed to the update call to create the certification, query call to return the certificate and fron-end to verify the certificate.

keywords: [security, concept, authenticity, integrity, certification]
---

import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import { AdornedTabs } from "/src/components/Tabs/AdornedTabs";
import { AdornedTab } from "/src/components/Tabs/AdornedTab";
import { BetaChip } from "/src/components/Chip/BetaChip";
import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Security best practices: Data integrity and authenticity

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Security", "Concept"]} />

## Certified variables

### Security concern

ICP offers three modes of operations for canisters, `update`, `query` and `composite_query`. For the sake of simplicity, we will club `composite_query` under queries for the rest of this section. For more information, view the  [detailed overview between `update` and `query` calls](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#introduction). As explained in the overview, update calls are slow and expensive but provide integrity guarantee as they are responded with a threshold signature signed by the subnet. 

> On the other hand, query calls are fast since they are responded by a single replica but **there is no integrity guarantee, since the response can be manipulated if the responding replica or the boundary node is malicious.** For example, if the NNS dapp fetches proposal information from the governance canister via query calls and the responding node is malicious, it can mask an ill intentioned proposal that causes irrevocable damage as innocuous by modifying the proposal payload in the response and mislead voters into voting yes. Another consequence of query calls is that users can't rely on [canister_inspect_message](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/iam#do-not-rely-on-ingress-message-inspection) as a guard. **This makes query calls, in it's raw form, unfit to serve data for security critical applications.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, query calls are fast since they are responded by a single replica but **there is no integrity guarantee, since the response can be manipulated by a single replica or the boundary node.** For example, if the NNS dapp fetches proposal information from the governance canister via query calls and the responding node is malicious, it can mask an ill intentioned proposal that causes irrevocable damage as innocuous by modifying the proposal payload in the response and mislead voters into voting yes. Another consequence of query calls is that users can't rely on [canister_inspect_message](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/iam#do-not-rely-on-ingress-message-inspection) as a guard. **This makes query calls, in it's raw form, unfit to serve data for security critical applications.**
```

:::tip
Certified variables is an advanced feature which require careful implementation of authenticated data structures and verification on the canister and client side respectively. **If the client doesn't require fast response times, call the query method as an update call (replicated query).** The response would be certified by the subnet and a single malicious or boundary node can't modify the response.
:::

:::tip
ICP also provides replica signed queries, where query responses are signed by the answering replica node, however it doesn't have the same security guarantees an `update` call and only protects from malicious boundary nodes. Replica signed queries are enabled by default on both `agent-rs` and `agent-js`. [Read more about the feature](https://internetcomputer.org/blog/features/replica-signed-queries).
:::

### What is certified data?

> A canister can store a small amount of data (32 bytes) during an update call in the state tree under `certified_data` which will be certified by the subnet. During a query call, the canister can obtain a certificate about that data, which can be verified against the IC root public key. Combining these features, a canister should be able to certify a variable in a query response with this [design](https://medium.com/dfinity/how-internet-computer-responses-are-certified-as-authentic-2ff1bb1ea659). 

Reviewer: I've written an alternative introduction. It also explains the issue with calculations in query calls. WDYT?

> For a subnet to certify data, it has to create a signature over all certified data during an update call. Each update call that modifies the data needs to recreate this signature. However, a canister won't simply sign an arbitrarily large amount of data in complex data structure. It is limited to signing just 32 bytes which will end up in the subnet state tree under `certified_data`. Since this is rarely enough, it is up to the developer to reduce the data into this 32 bytes. Naturally, this can be done by computing a hash of the data structure. This is also why certified data is difficult to implement. Depending on your data structures, you will need to develop a different kind of hashing function.
> 
> Subsequent query calls can return the data as-is, including the signature which the front-end can verify. This means that data aggregation or other calculations can't be done in query calls as there would be no way to produce a signature over that newly created data. There are two workarounds, either this data is precomputed in the update call or all raw data is sent to the front-end which verifies it and does the calculations.

Author: I will try to adapt this.

On a high level, in your canister,

> 1. Choose an [authenticated data strucutre](https://cs.brown.edu/research/pubs/pdfs/2003/Tamassia-2003-ADS.pdf) like Merkle trees for storing the value in canister memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Choose an [authenticated data strucutre](https://cs.brown.edu/research/pubs/pdfs/2003/Tamassia-2003-ADS.pdf) like Merkle trees to store a value in canister memory.
```

2. In the **update** call,

>   - Perform the computation and store the result in the Merkle store.

Reviewer: Do you mean Merkle tree?

  - The lookup path for the result must act as it's `key`. Ideally this `key` should be the parameters provided by the caller in the query method.
  - Recompute the Merkle proof (`root_hash`)
  - Store the `root_hash` as the canister's certified data.

>   - Return the `key` as response.

Reviewer: Why do you need to return the key?

Author: The `key` would be used as the query parameter to fetch the data. If it's transparent to the user, the canister need not respond anything. But if you use an internal counter, I suppose you would need to return it as the response.

3. In the **query** call, 
  - Fetch the result from the Merkle strucutre using the query parameters as the lookup path.
  - Fetch the current `certified_data` for the canister.

>   - Compute the witness for the result using the same lookup path. Merkle witness provide proof of inclusion that the requested result exists in the Merkle store under the given path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Compute the witness for the result using the same lookup path. The Merkle witness provides proof of inclusion that the requested result exists in the Merkle tree under the given path.
```

  - Return `(result, certified_data, witness)` as the response.

The rest of the section shows an example canister, which can serve a certified response for a `query` using `certified_data` which is verified in the frond-end. The examples are written in Rust and Motoko but the overall design can be implemented in other languages.

### Building a canister with certified variables
Let's consider the following canister interface:

```c
type User = record {
    name: text;
    age: nat8;
};

type CertifiedUser = record {
    user : User;
    certificate : blob;
    witness : blob;
};

service : {
    "set_user": (User) -> (nat64);
    "get_user": (nat64) -> (CertifiedUser) query;
}
```

The canister exposes the following service:

> * **set_user**: The caller provides a `User` object to the canister. The canister records it and serves a corresponding `index` for the entry as the response. Since `certified_data` can only store 32 bytes of data, it uses a specialized data structure from `ic_certified_map` to store the `User` data. 

Reviewer: The ic_certified_map is doing much of the heavy lifting here. Should we educate users on how to create their own certified data structures?

Author: > Should we educate users on how to create their own certified data structures?

That would be it's own page since there's too much stuff. I believe here people shouldn't roll their own crypto as there are things you can go wrong while build the hash tree. 

> Such as hash collisions.
> the `root_hash` cryptographically guarantees that only one tree can correspond to that hash.

We already mention this. I don't think we should discuss about hash collisions and this would just make it more confusing.

      case (null) {
        Debug.trap("Decoding failed for age");
      };
    };

    return {
      name = name;
      age = age;
    };
  };

  func blobOfNat64(n : Nat64) : Blob {
    let byteMask : Nat64 = 0xff;
    func byte(x : Nat64) : Nat8 {
      Nat8.fromNat(Nat64.toNat(x));
    };
    Blob.fromArray([
      byte(((byteMask << 56) & n) >> 56),
      byte(((byteMask << 48) & n) >> 48),
      byte(((byteMask << 40) & n) >> 40),
      byte(((byteMask << 32) & n) >> 32),
      byte(((byteMask << 24) & n) >> 24),
      byte(((byteMask << 16) & n) >> 16),
      byte(((byteMask << 8) & n) >> 8),
      byte(((byteMask << 0) & n) >> 0),
    ]);
  };

};

```

</TabItem>
</AdornedTabs>

### Verifying certified variables

Once you have the response `CertifiedUser`, for the integrity guarantee, the front-end must verify the certification in the response. This is broken down into several steps implemented in the Rust and JavaScript example below.

:::note
The example has some extra steps to setup the canister with some `User` data before verification. You can ignore the section marked between `// ==== START of canister data setup` and `// ==== END of canister data setup`
:::

> 1. Recompute the `root_hash` of `certificate.tree` (pruned state tree with the canister's `certified_data`) and verify the `certificate.signature` with `root_hash` as the message,`certificate.delegation`, and the IC `root_key` as the public key. This confirms that the signature is valid for the current state tree. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify the IC certificate: Recompute the `root_hash` of `certificate.tree` (pruned state tree with the canister's `certified_data`) and verify the `certificate.signature` with `root_hash` as the message,`certificate.delegation`, and the IC `root_key` as the public key. This confirms that the signature is valid for the current state tree. 
```

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Security", "Concept"]} />

> ## Using Certified Variables for secure queries 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Using certified variables for secure queries 
```

> ICP offers three modes of operations for canisters namely `update`, `query` and `composite_query`. For the sake of simplicity, we will club `composite_query` under queries for the rest of the section. A detailed overview between `update` and `query` calls can be found [here](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#introduction). In general, queries have fast response time but lack integrity guarantees, which makes them unfit for security critical applications. To obtain query like response times and update like certified responses, developers could make use of `certified_data` in the state tree to certify the response served in a query. Alternatively, these calls could be issued as update calls by the caller (e.g. in agent-js), but that impacts performance by taking a few seconds. Some examples of Certified Variables are asset certification in [Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/b29a6f68bbe5a49d048e12bc7a3263a9f43d080b/src/internet_identity/src/main.rs#L775-L808), [NNS dapp](https://github.com/dfinity/nns-dapp/blob/372c3562127d70c2fde059bc9c268e8ae858583e/rs/src/assets.rs#L121-L145), or the [canister signature implementation in Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/main/src/internet_identity/src/signature_map.rs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ICP offers three modes of operations for canisters, `update`, `query` and `composite_query`. For the sake of simplicity, we will club `composite_query` under queries for the rest of this section. For more information, view the  [detailed overview between `update` and `query` calls](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#introduction). 

In general, queries have fast response time but lack integrity guarantees, which makes them unfit for security critical applications. To obtain query-like response times and update-like certified responses, developers can make use of `certified_data` in the state tree to certify the response served in a query. Alternatively, these calls could be issued as update calls by the caller (e.g. in agent-js), but that impacts performance by taking a few seconds. 

Some examples of certified variables are asset certification in [Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/b29a6f68bbe5a49d048e12bc7a3263a9f43d080b/src/internet_identity/src/main.rs#L775-L808), [NNS dapp](https://github.com/dfinity/nns-dapp/blob/372c3562127d70c2fde059bc9c268e8ae858583e/rs/src/assets.rs#L121-L145), or the [canister signature implementation in Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/main/src/internet_identity/src/signature_map.rs).
```

:::tip

> ICP also provides Replica signed queries, where query responses are signed by the answering replica node but however it doesn't have the same security guarantees as `update` calls. Replica signed queries are enabled by default on both `agent-rs` and `agent-js`. You can read more about the feature [here](https://internetcomputer.org/blog/features/replica-signed-queries)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ICP also provides replica signed queries, where query responses are signed by the answering replica node, however it doesn't have the same security guarantees an `update` call. Replica signed queries are enabled by default on both `agent-rs` and `agent-js`. [Read more about the feature](https://internetcomputer.org/blog/features/replica-signed-queries).
```

:::

> ### What's Certified data?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What is certified data?
```

> * A canister can store a small amount of data (32 bytes) during an update call in the state tree under `certified_data` which will be certified by the subnet.

Reviewer 2: Why is this info formatted as bullet points? Could this be reformatted as a normal paragraph?

* During query call, the canister can obtain a certificate about that data, which can be verified by the IC root public key.

In the rest of the section, we will see an example of how to design a canister, which can serve a certified response for a `query` using `certified_data` and how to verify the response. The examples are written in Rust but can be imported to other languages following the same recommendations.

> ### Building a canister with Certified Variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Building a canister with certified variables
```

Let's consider the following canister,

```c
type User = record {
    name: text;
    age: nat8;
};

type CertifiedUser = record {
    user : User;
    certificate : blob;
    witness : blob;
};

service : {
    "set_user": (User) -> (nat64);
    "get_user": (nat64) -> (CertifiedUser) query;
}
```

The canister exposes the following service, 

> * **set_user** - The caller provides a `User` object to the canister. The canister records it and serves a corresponding `index` for the entry as the response. Since `certified_data` can only store 32 bytes of data, we use a specialized data strucutre from `ic_certified_map` to store the `User` data. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **set_user**: The caller provides a `User` object to the canister. The canister records it and serves a corresponding `index` for the entry as the response. Since `certified_data` can only store 32 bytes of data, it uses a specialized data structure from `ic_certified_map` to store the `User` data. 
```

>   * The data strucutre internally stores the data in a `HashTree` and we record the `root_hash` of the data structure in the `certified_data`, which is 32 bytes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * The data structure internally stores the data in a `HashTree` and records the `root_hash` of the data structure in the `certified_data`, which is 32 bytes. 
```

>   * The `root_hash` cryptographically guarantees that only one tree can correspond to that hash. You can read more about it [here](https://docs.rs/ic-certified-map/latest/ic_certified_map/struct.RbTree.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * The `root_hash` cryptographically guarantees that only one [tree can correspond to that hash](https://docs.rs/ic-certified-map/latest/ic_certified_map/struct.RbTree.html).
```

> * **get_user** - The caller provides a `index: nat64` to the canister and gets a Certified response for the corresponding `User`. The CertifiedUser response must have the following strucutre for verifying the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **get_user**: The caller provides a `index: nat64` to the canister and gets a certified response for the corresponding `User`. The `CertifiedUser` response must have the following structure for verifying the response:
```

>   * **user** - The actual response
>   * **certificate** - The payload for verifying the signature on the `certified_data`. ICP provides the system API `data_certificate()` for this 
>   * **witness** - The witness allows us to complete the final verification of the response with the requested input and `certified_data`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **user**: The actual response.
  * **certificate**: The payload for verifying the signature on the `certified_data`. ICP provides the system API `data_certificate()` for this.
  * **witness**: Allows for the final verification of the response to be completed with the requested input and `certified_data`.
```

                let mut inner = RbTree::new();
                inner.insert(index.to_be_bytes(), user);
                tree.insert("user", inner);
            }
        }
        ic_cdk::api::set_certified_data(&tree.root_hash());
    });
    index
}

#[ic_cdk::query]
fn get_user(index: u64) -> CertifiedUser {
    let certificate = ic_cdk::api::data_certificate().expect("No data certificate available");

    TREE.with_borrow(|tree| {
        let user = match tree.get(b"user") {
            Some(inner) => {
                let user = inner.get(&index.to_be_bytes()[..]).expect("User not found");
                user.to_owned()
            }
            None => {
                panic!("Tree isn't initialized");
            }
        };

        let mut witness = vec![];
        let mut witness_serializer = serde_cbor::Serializer::new(&mut witness);
        let _ = witness_serializer.self_describe();
        tree.nested_witness(b"user", |inner| inner.witness(&index.to_be_bytes()[..]))
            .serialize(&mut witness_serializer)
            .unwrap();

        CertifiedUser {
            user,
            certificate,
            witness,
        }
    })
}
```

> ### Verifying the Certified Variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Verifying certified variables
```

Once you have the response `CertifiedUser`, for the secureness guarantee, one must verify the certification in the response. This is broken down into several steps with an example below implementing these steps in Rust.

:::note
The example has some extra steps to setup the canister with some `User` data before verification. You can ignore the section marked between `// ==== START of canister data setup` and `// ==== END of canister data setup`
:::

> 1. Recompute the `root_hash` of `certificate.tree` (pruned state tree with the canister's `certified_data`) and verify the `certificate.signature` with `root_hash` as message and `certificate.delegation` and IC root_key as the public key. This confirms that the signature is valid for the current state tree. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Recompute the `root_hash` of `certificate.tree` (pruned state tree with the canister's `certified_data`) and verify the `certificate.signature` with `root_hash` as the message,`certificate.delegation`, and the IC `root_key` as the public key. This confirms that the signature is valid for the current state tree. 
```

2. Validate that the response is not stale by verifying the time at `/time` in `certificate.tree` is less than a certain delta of currrent time. The recommended delta is 5 minutes.

> 3. Recompute the `root_hash` of witness and verify equality with the `certified_data`. The `certified_data` can be obtained from `certificate.tree` under the path `/canister/<canister_id>/certified_data`
> 4. Check if query parameters are in the witness. In our example, the lookup path is `/user/<index>` and it should be present in the witness. 
> 5. Validate if the value found in `/user/<index>` matches `user` from the response. 
> 6. If all of previous steps succceed, return `user` as the valid response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Recompute the `root_hash` of the witness and verify equality with the `certified_data`. The `certified_data` can be obtained from `certificate.tree` under the path `/canister/<canister_id>/certified_data`.
4. Check if query parameters are in the witness. In this example, the lookup path is `/user/<index>` and should be present in the witness. 
5. Validate if the value found in `/user/<index>` matches `user` from the response. 
6. If all of the previous steps succeed, return `user` as the valid response.
```

> <MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Security", "Concept"]} />

Reviewer: Not sure if this is still intermediate.

Reviewer 2: I would classify this as 'Advanced'

Queries have fast response time but lack integrity guarantees, which makes them unfit for security critical applications. To obtain query like response times and update like certified responses, developers could make use of `certified_data` in the state tree to certify the response served in a query. Alternatively, these calls could be issued as update calls by the caller (e.g. in agent-js), but that impacts performance by taking a few seconds. Some examples of Certified Variables are asset certification in [Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/b29a6f68bbe5a49d048e12bc7a3263a9f43d080b/src/internet_identity/src/main.rs#L775-L808), [NNS dapp](https://github.com/dfinity/nns-dapp/blob/372c3562127d70c2fde059bc9c268e8ae858583e/rs/src/assets.rs#L121-L145), or the [canister signature implementation in Internet Identity](https://github.com/dfinity/internet-identity/blob/main/src/internet_identity/src/signature_map.rs).

:::tip

> ICP also provides Replica signed queries, where query responses are signed by the answering replica node but however it doesn't have the same security guarantees as `update` calls. Replica signed queries are enabled by default on both `agent-rs` and `agent-js`. You can read more about the feature [here](https://internetcomputer.org/blog/features/replica-signed-queries)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ICP also provides Replica signed queries, where query responses are signed by the answering replica node but it doesn't have the same security guarantees as `update` calls. Replica signed queries are enabled by default on both `agent-rs` and `agent-js`. You can read more about the feature [here](https://internetcomputer.org/blog/features/replica-signed-queries)
```

:::

> ### What's Certified data?

Reviewer: I would elaborate on this a bit more. Maybe using a diagram that includes the data struct, the hash, the signature/certificate and where it is updated/created (update), retrieved (query) and validated (client).

I'm also missing the drawbacks/caveats of certified data. For example, this doesn't work if your query call returns a calculation result since only update calls can update the certificate. The workaround it to give all the certified source data to the client which can check the certificate and make the same calculations or to have certain pre calculated values certified in update calls.

Author: I think this is already explained in Certified Variables section and I have referenced the link.

Reviewer: Maybe [this](https://f7i7o-aaaaa-aaaam-abtba-cai.icp0.io/how-it-works/response-certification/#certified-variables) is also a good resource. There is even a 30min [YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3mZHEfICi_U) we could link.

Author: Added a section with a high level explanation of certified variables.

* A canister can store a small amount of data (32 bytes) during an update call in the state tree under `certified_data` which will be certified by the subnet.

> * During query call, the canister can obtain a certificate about that data, which can be verified by the IC root public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* During a query call, the canister can obtain a certificate about that data, which can be verified by the IC root public key.
```

> In the rest of the section, we will see an example of how to design a canister, which can serve a certified response for a `query` using `certified_data` and how to verify the response. The examples are written in Rust but can be imported to other languages following the same recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rest of the section shows an example canister, which can serve a certified response for a `query` using `certified_data` which is verified in the frond-end. The examples are written in Rust but the overall design can be implemented in other languages.
```
Imported implies this is automatic.

### Building a canister with Certified Variables

> Let's consider the following canister,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider the following canister interface:
```

```c
type User = record {
    name: text;
    age: nat8;
};

type CertifiedUser = record {
    user : User;
    certificate : blob;
    witness : blob;
};

service : {
    "set_user": (User) -> (nat64);
    "get_user": (nat64) -> (CertifiedUser) query;
}
```

> The canister exposes the following service, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The canister exposes the following service:
```

* **set_user** - The caller provides a `User` object to the canister. The canister records it and serves a corresponding `index` for the entry as the response. Since `certified_data` can only store 32 bytes of data, we use a specialized data strucutre from `ic_certified_map` to store the `User` data. 
  * The data strucutre internally stores the data in a `HashTree` and we record the `root_hash` of the data structure in the `certified_data`, which is 32 bytes. 

>   * The `root_hash` cryptographically guarantees that only one tree can correspond to that hash. You can read more about it [here](https://docs.rs/ic-certified-map/latest/ic_certified_map/struct.RbTree.html).

Reviewer: The referenced documentation doesn't really explain HashTrees. Is there a better source for people to understand how a 32 bytes hash can certify an endless datastructure?

Author: I don't think we have anything explaining Merkle Trees.  I can reword it a bit and point to Merkle trees Wiki page.

> * **get_user** - The caller provides a `index: nat64` to the canister and gets a Certified response for the corresponding `User`. The CertifiedUser response must have the following strucutre for verifying the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **get_user** - The caller provides an `index: nat64` to the canister and gets a certified response for the corresponding `User`. The `CertifiedUser` response must have the following structure to allow verifying the response:
```

                inner.insert(index.to_be_bytes(), user);
                tree.insert("user", inner);
            }
        }
        ic_cdk::api::set_certified_data(&tree.root_hash());
    });
    index
}

#[ic_cdk::query]
fn get_user(index: u64) -> CertifiedUser {
    let certificate = ic_cdk::api::data_certificate().expect("No data certificate available");

    TREE.with_borrow(|tree| {
        let user = match tree.get(b"user") {
            Some(inner) => {
                let user = inner.get(&index.to_be_bytes()[..]).expect("User not found");
                user.to_owned()
            }
            None => {
                panic!("Tree isn't initialized");
            }
        };

        let mut witness = vec![];
        let mut witness_serializer = serde_cbor::Serializer::new(&mut witness);
        let _ = witness_serializer.self_describe();
        tree.nested_witness(b"user", |inner| inner.witness(&index.to_be_bytes()[..]))
            .serialize(&mut witness_serializer)
            .unwrap();

        CertifiedUser {
            user,
            certificate,
            witness,
        }
    })
}
```

### Verifying the Certified Variables

> Once you have the response `CertifiedUser`, for the secureness guarantee, one must verify the certification in the response. This is broken down into several steps with an example below implementing these steps in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have the response `CertifiedUser`, for the integrity guarantee, the front-end must verify the certification in the response. This is broken down into several steps implemented in the Rust example below.
```

Author: I haven't use agent-js much to know if all of this can be done in a similar way. But I agree, having it in JS/TS would be best useful for the community. I can do a follow up PR sometime later to add the JS variant.

:::note
The example has some extra steps to setup the canister with some `User` data before verification. You can ignore the section marked between `// ==== START of canister data setup` and `// ==== END of canister data setup`
:::

1. Recompute the `root_hash` of `certificate.tree` (pruned state tree with the canister's `certified_data`) and verify the `certificate.signature` with `root_hash` as message and `certificate.delegation` and IC root_key as the public key. This confirms that the signature is valid for the current state tree. 

> 2. Validate that the response is not stale by verifying the time at `/time` in `certificate.tree` is less than a certain delta of currrent time. The recommended delta is 5 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Validate that the response is not stale by verifying the time at `/time` in `certificate.tree` is less than a certain delta of current time. The recommended delta is 5 minutes but should be adapted to the use case.
```
I'm wondering if we have a concrete example where the /time would have to be more recent than 5 minutes. Maybe some sort of DeFi app where price information determines the default order price which could trick users into using a 5 min old value that would make them overpay on a market order.

Author: We could add one when we add a best practice about system time. Right now, even agents enforce 5m and not sure if it's adaptable.

    agent
        .fetch_root_key()
        .await
        .expect("Unable to fetch root key");
    let root_key = agent.read_root_key();

    let canister_id = Principal::from_text(CANISTER).unwrap();

    // ==== START of canister data setup
    let mut rng = rand::thread_rng();
    
    // Make MAX_CALLS to set_user
    let mut get_user_calls = Vec::new();
    for _ in 0..MAX_CALLS {
        let bytes: [u8; 16] = rng.gen();
        let mut u = Unstructured::new(&bytes[..]);
        let temp_user = User::arbitrary(&mut u).unwrap();

        println!("Calling set_user with {:?}", temp_user);
        let response = agent
            .update(&canister_id, "set_user")
            .with_effective_canister_id(canister_id)
            .with_arg(Encode!(&temp_user).unwrap())
            .call_and_wait();
        get_user_calls.push(response);
    }
    let results: Vec<u64> = join_all(get_user_calls)
        .await
        .into_iter()
        .map(|result| {
            Decode!(
                result
                    .expect("Query call get_user failed")
                    .as_slice(),
                u64
            )
            .unwrap()
        })
        .collect();

>     // From response indexes, chose a random index for get_user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // From response indexes, choose a random index for get_user
```

    let index: usize = rng.gen();
    let index: u64 = *results.get(index % MAX_CALLS).unwrap();
    // ==== END of canister data setup

    println!("Fetching index {:?}", index);

    let query_response = agent
        .query(&canister_id, "get_user")
        .with_effective_canister_id(canister_id)
        .with_arg(Encode!(&index).unwrap())
        .call()
        .await
        .expect("Unable to call query call get_user");

    let certified_user = Decode!(&query_response, CertifiedUser).unwrap();

    let mut deserializer = Deserializer::from_slice(&certified_user.certificate);
    let certificate: Certificate = serde::de::Deserialize::deserialize(&mut deserializer).unwrap();

    let start = SystemTime::now();
    let current_time = start
        .duration_since(UNIX_EPOCH)
        .expect("Time went backwards")
        .as_nanos();

>     // Step 1: Check if signature in the certificate can be validated with the root_hash of the tree in certificate as message and root_key as public_key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Step 1: Check if signature in the certificate can be validated with the 
    // root_hash of the tree in certificate as message and root_key as public_key
```
Split into two lines for readability.

    let verification_result = certificate.verify(canister_id.as_slice(), &root_key[..]);

    println!(
        "Step 1: Digest match & Signature verification: {:?}",
        verification_result
    );

    // Step 2: Check if the response is not stale with the given time offset MAX_CERT_TIME_OFFSET_NS.
    let time_verification_result =
        validate_certificate_time(&certificate, &current_time, &MAX_CERT_TIME_OFFSET_NS);

    println!("Step 2: Time skew: {:?}", time_verification_result);

    // Step 3: Check if witness root_hash matches the certified_data
    let lookup_result =
        certificate
            .tree
            .lookup_path([b"canister", canister_id.as_slice(), b"certified_data"]);

    let certified_data: [u8; 32] = match lookup_result {
        LookupResult::Found(result) => result.try_into().unwrap(),
        _ => panic!("Certified data not found"),
    };

    let mut deserializer = Deserializer::from_slice(&certified_user.witness);
    let witness_decoded: HashTree<Vec<u8>> =
        serde::de::Deserialize::deserialize(&mut deserializer).unwrap();
    let witness_digest = witness_decoded.digest();

    println!(

>         "Step 3: Witness digest mataches certified data: {:?} ",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "Step 3: Witness digest matches certified data: {:?} ",
```

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Security", "Concept"]} />

## Certified variables

### Security concern

> ICP offers three modes of operations for canisters, `update`, `query` and `composite_query`. For the sake of simplicity, we will club `composite_query` under queries for the rest of this section. For more information, view the  [detailed overview between `update` and `query` calls](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#introduction). As explained in the overview, update calls are slow and expensive but provide integrity guarantee as they are responded with a threshold signature signed by the subnet. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ICP offers three modes of operations for canisters, `update`, `query` and `composite_query`. For the sake of simplicity, we will club `composite_query` under queries for the rest of this section. For more information, view the  [detailed overview between `update` and `query` calls](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/call/overview/#introduction). As explained in the overview, update calls are slow and expensive but provide integrity guarantees as their response include a threshold signature signed by the subnet. 
```

> On the other hand, query calls are fast since they are responded by a single replica but **there is no integrity guarantee, since the response can be manipulated if the responding replica or the boundary node is malicious.** For example, if the NNS dapp fetches proposal information from the governance canister via query calls and the responding node is malicious, it can mask an ill intentioned proposal that causes irrevocable damage as innocuous by modifying the proposal payload in the response and mislead voters into voting yes. Another consequence of query calls is that users can't rely on [canister_inspect_message](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/iam#do-not-rely-on-ingress-message-inspection) as a guard. **This makes query calls, in it's raw form, unfit to serve data for security critical applications.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, query calls are fast since a single replica formulates the response but **there is no integrity guarantee, since the response can be manipulated if the responding replica or the boundary node is malicious.** For example, if the NNS dapp fetches proposal information from the governance canister via query calls and the responding node is malicious, it can mask an ill intentioned proposal that causes irrevocable damage as innocuous by modifying the proposal payload in the response and mislead voters into voting yes. Another consequence of query calls is that users can't rely on [canister_inspect_message](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/developer-docs/security/security-best-practices/iam#do-not-rely-on-ingress-message-inspection) as a guard. **This makes query calls, in it's raw form, unfit to serve data for security critical applications.**
```

Inspect message should never be relied upon for anything but DoS protection. I'm not sure if your phrasing suggests otherwise. Do you mean inspect message only runs on update calls or that query calls have no other method for access control?
